This is one of the weirdest pieces of
art I think I've ever seen. It's M.C.
Escher's 1956 lithograph, The Print
Gallery. And it takes a little moment to
wrap your head around what's going on.
We have a man looking at a picture of a
boat. That boat is in a harbor of a
small town with all these clustered
buildings. And you go over and one of
those buildings is a gallery full of
artwork. And down the hall, here we find
the same man staring at a picture of a
boat. In a letter to his son, Escher
called this "the most peculiar thing
that I have ever done." Which for him is
saying a lot. In 2003, the
mathematicians De Smit and Lenstra
offered a really delightful analysis of
what's really going on beneath the
scenes of this picture. And it's
something Escher himself didn't even
realize. The crux involves a very
beautiful idea that can be summarized as
taking the logarithm of an image. That
might sound like nonsense, but I
promise, if you explain it the right
way, it's actually a really cool and
abundantly reasonable thing to do. One
conclusion that popped out of this
analysis is an answer to a question that
doesn't even feel like it should have an
answer, which is what exactly goes in
this hole in the middle? If you think
about it, that almost seems paradoxical
because if you come at it from above, it
looks like it should be part of the
town. But if you come at it from the
left, it's more fitting to be part of
the picture frame. Come at it from below
and it seems more like part of the print
gallery. So somehow all of the ambiguity
about where exactly you are in this
whole scene is compressed into that
blank spot in the middle.
The full video I made about this topic
is really one of my favorites in a long
time. So next time you're in the mood to
be out of the shorts feed and sitting
down for something longer, it would mean
a lot to me if you considered taking a
look.